Project #6. Comparing postmortems and practices
Collaborating faculty: Jamie Davis

Motivation and Problem Statement
Every engineered system will encounter a failure -- even the fault-tolerant ones. Major tech companies
put out postmortems and incident reports to describe what went wrong and how they plan to ameliorate it.
These documents are often issued for political/business reasons, e.g., to reassure stakeholders that the
product is trustworthy, and to dissuade legislators from regulation. However, some of these documents also
contain valuable systems engineering knowledge. It would be nice if future systems can avoid the mistakes
that plagued past ones. What, if anything, can other engineers learn from these postmortems?

Project Goals
You will develop a tool to automatically distinguish "engineering-oriented" from "politically-oriented"
postmortem writeups across major technology companies, and describe the extent to which a public body
of engineering-oriented postmortems truly exists (e.g., how relevant are their contents to engineers at other
organizations?). You will compare and contrast these postmortems to the Log4J writeup from the
Department of Homeland Security, as well as to other notable government failure reports (Toyota
unintended acceleration, Challenger explosion, etc.) You will automatically (or manually?) extract key
features from the postmortems in order to measure the relative incidence of different kinds of failures,
applying existing or novel taxonomies as needed to organize the knowledge.

Sampler papers

[1] Anandayuvaraj, Dharun, and James C. Davis. "Reflecting on Recurring Failures in IoT
Development." 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering.
2022.

[2] Department of Homeland Security. “Cyber Safety Review Board Releases Unprecedented Report of
its Review into Log4j Vulnerabilities and Response.” https://www.dhs.gov/news/2022/07/14/cyber-
safety-review-board-releases-report-its-review-log4j-vulnerabilities-and

[3] Chen, Junjie, Xiaoting He, Qingwei Lin, Yong Xu, Hongyu Zhang, Dan Hao, Feng Gao, Zhangwei
Xu, Yingnong Dang, and Dongmei Zhang. "An empirical investigation of incident triage for online
service systems." In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering:
Software Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP), pp. 111-120. IEEE, 2019.
